the UK government says it will stop some
of its arms exports to Israel fearing
the use of certain weapons could break
international law Israel's prime
minister calls the move shameful and
says it will help Hamas but what are the
implications of this decision this is
Inside Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm FIB
batibo the UK says it's suspending 30
licenses out of 350 for arms exports to
Israel its foreign secretary David Lamy
made the announcement in Parliament but
his colleague the defense minister has
been on the airwaves playing down the
impact of the decision while Israel has
responded in Anger with Benin Netanyahu
calling it shameful some UK politicians
however say the move is not enough and
want a full ban on arms exports to
Israel so why has the UK a staunch Ally
of Israel taken this decision now is it
linked to International legal action
against the war on Gaza and what's the
wider International implication we'll
put that to our guests in just a moment
but first this report from
sahat on the same day that Israel was
bearing the bodies of six captives held
in Gaza
and Palestinians were being killed in
Israel's Relentless bombing of the Gaza
Strip and Israeli military raids were
being carried out in the occupied West
Bank the British foreign secretary
announced the UK's immediate suspension
of around 30 licenses to export arms to
Israel dat it is with regret that I
inform the house today the assessment I
have received leaves me unable to
conclude anything other than that for
certain UK arms exports to Israel there
does exist a clear risk that they might
be used to commit or facilitate a
serious violation of international
humanitarian
law but critics say it's not enough
since this affects only 30 out of 350 UK
licenses that Supply Israel with
everything from components for military
aircraft and drones plus parts that
facilitate ground
targeting from 2022 to June last year
the UK sent nearly $75 million worth of
weapons to
Israel the UK insists this latest
measure is not a blanket ban and only
affects weapons that could be used in
serious breach of international
humanitarian law Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has condemned the
decision calling it shameful adding with
or without British arms Israel will win
this war and secure our common
future in the UK the nation's Chief
Rabbi says the move beggar belief and
will only encourage our shared
enemies the British government has faced
months of widespread protests against
the war in Gaza with tens of thousands
calling for an end to British arms
exports to
Israel just last week the eu's top
Diplomat Joseph Burell initiated
procedures to ask member states to
consider sanctioning some Israeli
ministers Israel is facing accusations
of carrying out a genocide against
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip more than
40,000 people have been killed since
October 7 and despite International
efforts and large protests in Israel a
ceasefire deal is yet to
materialize s Al
jazer while a number of countries have
changed their arms Supply arrangements
with Israel since the War Began in
February a Dutch Court banned the export
of F35 fighter jets parts to Israel
citing concerns about rights violations
in Gaza but another Court ruling in May
allowed exports to other countries like
the US which could then send them to
Israel in Denmark campaign groups have
taken legal action against the
government to stop armed exports to
Israel Italy which has been one of the
largest exporters of arms to Israel has
stopped new sales but still continues to
honor previous contracts in March
Canada's parliament voted to freeze
armed sales to Israel but it doesn't
apply to permits worth millions of
dollars already approved all those
supplied through the US and a Japanese
firm cut ties with an Israeli arms
manufacturer after an order from the icj
in January
let's bring in our guests for today's
show in London is Jeremy Corbin an
independent UK Member of Parliament and
the former labor party leader is a
longtime advocate for the Palestinian
cause in Tunis Franchesca albanesi the
United Nations special RoR on the
occupied Palestinian territories and in
dundi in the UK Sam Perlo Freeman a
research coordinator at the campaign
against arms trade a uk- based
organization working to end the
international arms trade a warm welcome
to all of you thank you so much for for
being with us today on Al jazer uh
Franchesca albanesi in Tunis let me
start with you how do you view this
decision by the British government to
suspend some licenses will it have an
actual impact on the ground will it make
a difference for the Palestinian
people uh I cannot tell you whether it's
going to make an impact while not all uh
arms transfers to Israel have been
suspended the UK as you have St in the
opening is just one of those who are of
the member states who are providing
weapons to Israel and not all licenses
have been suspended but let me say
because we need to put this in context
um it seems to me that states have still
to register the sismic sheet represented
by um International Development that
hurt the deer there has just been an
international court of justice advisory
opinion that declares Israel's presence
in the entire occupied Palestinian
territory unlawful to be dismantled um
and um reparations have to be made to
the Palestinians these are serious
implications for member states who have
under the law of State responsibility an
obligation not to uh Aid and assist the
legality of the occupation and at the
same time by January 26 this year there
has been a set of provisional measures
ordered by the international court of
justice which has recognized the
plausibility that Israel is committing
genocide in Gaza and these provisional
measures uh oblige member states not to
uh Aid and assist uh in the commission
of genocide this is the context in which
all arms exports including the transfer
of crude oil that can be used to refuel
jets for example have to be suspended
yeah thank you for giving us the context
there it was uh very important what do
you think then Franchesca is the purpose
of this step by the UK government my
assessment is that there is a
recognition an increasing recognition
that Israel is committing a serious uh
of international crimes and there is a
huge pressure in the UK and in other
countries for the the the UK the
government in the UK not to be complicit
in this but there is also the
recognition that under the um the the
the the order given by the international
court of justice there might be
complicity in Acts of genocide so there
is a moment of Awakening but again this
is the beginning and it's still not
enough right I I will ask you about the
implications of this in a little while
Franchesca let me bring Jeremy Corbin
into the conversation Mr Corbin uh David
Lamy the foreign secretary has said that
the UK has a legal duty to review arms
exports but do you think this decision
to suspend some of these licenses is
purely legal or are they also political
uh reasons behind this well he's
required to assess the arms export
regime anyway the previous government
did the same and he has to do that the
arms export licensing legislation
requires every British government to do
that but at the end of the day it's a
political decision how much notice you
take of the legal advice you received
and uh David Lamy yesterday announced he
was going to suspend 30 arms licenses
out of
350 but then went on to say that this
wouldn't damage Israel's ability to
defend itself and today the defense
secretary John Healey has gone a bit
further to essentially say it doesn't
make very much difference and so you
then ask yourself the question is this a
political decision in order to try and
look as though they're listening to
international law um or is it something
that they're very serious about I am
honestly not certain what the answer to
that is yesterday I asked for
clarification from David Lamy on the
question of the use of British bases in
Cyprus there um bases are in Cyprus held
by the Royal Air Force these are
sovereign bases so it doesn't require
the permission of the suiet government
they are being used for flights over
Gaza and by taking planes directly into
Israel and I asked if this is going to
stop or not quite clearly the last thing
I'd say is on this section that the use
of British weapons in the face of both
the
icj view on genocide acts of genocide
and the ICC decision to
arrest issue arrest warrants for some
Israeli leaders actually leaves Britain
very vulnerable because parts of the
F-35 jets are made in Britain Britain
still supplies a lot of other weapons to
Israel so I don't think the legal case
against Britain is actually finished yet
there may well be legal action taken
against Britain who after all often
Prides itself as being the country that
always upholds international law so I
remain skeptical that this decision will
take us very much further and I remain
deeply angry that we are complicit in
the killing of now over
40,000 people in Gaza right and the
arrest warrants uh have haven't been
issued yet uh Sam let me get your your
thoughts about what we heard from both
Franchesca and Jeremy Corbin and your
thoughts also think this is a purely
legal decision or are are there
political uh aspects at play also here I
think the government was under a lot of
both political and legal pressure there
was outrage in the country about the UK
being complicit in genocide there is a
legal case coming up in October where
the government's being taken to court
over its refusal to suspend export
licenses so I I think in in some ways
they must have felt that it was
inevitable that they couldn't avoid
making some move but there is a huge
glaring exemption a loophole in this in
that they have Exempted components for
the F35 aircraft the UK produces 15% of
every F35 so long as those components go
via a third country usually the us so
you can't now export F35 Parts directly
to Israel they said there's a clear risk
they might be used to commit serious
violations of IHL right but they can go
to Israel if they go via the US exact so
why do you think the F35 components RIS
why do you think the F35 components
weren't included in the suspension is it
also in the interest of
relations in the interest of relations
with the US and the larger arms industry
the industry absolutely um Al although
Israel only gets a small proportion of
all the f-35s made overall the F-35
program is worth billions to UK industry
BAE Systems alone uh UK operations made
over a billion pounds in revenue from
the F35 program last year according to
their annual report so that's for all
countries not just Israel and so yes um
the UK government is making excuses
about this in the global supply chain
they could simply remove Israel from the
list of authorized destinations they
could tell the us we supplies these
parts for the F-35 but international law
and British Law requires that we do not
allow them to go to Israel but they do
not want to jeopardize their
relationship with the US their place in
the
F35 program and so they are coming up
with this convoluted excuse essentially
making up rules as they go along to
exempt the F35 and this was yesterday on
the very day we had for the first time
definite
confirmation that an F35 was used to
attack almasi so-called safe Zone in
Gaza with 3 2,000 pound bombs killing 90
people an
F35 15% of which is made in the UK the
UK is Choosing by this they're admitting
that Israel is not following
international law but they are choosing
to remain complicit with Israeli war
crimes for the sake of the arms industry
and relations with the us all right
Franchesca let me ask you about the The
Wider legal implications of this
decision does this decision to to
suspend some of these licenses does it
Shield or steer the UK away in any way
from the legal concerns of complicity in
the genocide in Gaza again as I said
absolutely no it doesn't Shield because
it's not enough to um to comply to the
fullest with the both The icj Advisory
opinion which is based on uh not
derogable law and uh with the icj
provisional measures concerning the
genocide case so these decisions um are
legal pronouncement they require every
member states to reevaluate their
engagement with with Israel and aold
international law because not doing that
risk further normalizing the occupation
and further eroding the multilateral
systems International law-based order so
there is a full gamut of actions that
need to be taken in order and each
government including the UK should do a
due diligence and reassess all economic
military strategic diplomatic and pol
forms of partnership that it has with
the with
Israel let me just ask you Fran to
clarify what does the UK risk today both
uh domestically and internationally by
continuing with this status quo so first
of all let me say that complicity
meaning having supported Israel's um 57
year old unlawful Endeavor it's
something that predates the current
moment but now under the circumstances
and in light with what is happening in
Gaza the genocide that has already been
committed in Gaza and there are serious
risks that there is a spillover onto the
West Bank there is a risk that the UK
government makes itself complicit with
acts of
genocide okay Jeremy Corin your thoughts
and why do you think there is this
ingrained official reluctance in the UK
to to think about suspending arm to
Israel despite the pressure from from
both uh the public and uh political
parties on on both sides of the aisle
there is a very deep security
relationship between Britain and Israel
hence the overflying and intelligence
that's collected from Gaza by the Royal
Air Force there is an enormous pressure
of the supporters of Israel both in the
UK Parliament and in the media and there
is a um very strong opposition mounted
against Palestinian opinion and people
in Britain so I think there's a
combination of factors there uh but it's
also a very strong Lobby from the
Armament industry the Armament industry
is very powerful and very big in Britain
they have huge numbers of government
contracts and international contracts
BAE Systems is an enormous uh
manufacturer in Britain and they are
very reluctant to see any restriction on
armed supplies anywhere in the world for
all all those reasons and so what David
Lamy tried to do yesterday was
demonstrate that somehow or other he is
um cognizant of the issues of Human
Rights abuses in uh Gaza well who isn't
because it's been happening for a long
time and he thought that by making this
statement he would some or other theate
the very strong opposition to his
strategy in the labor party party and
amongst others in Parliament including
my own group and um that he would come
out of it as uh somebody who was getting
on better with the pro Palestinian
opinion in Britain he hasn't actually
achieved either what he's done is upset
a whole lot of people who are very
pro-israel who believe that somehow or
other he's actually seriously
restricting arm supplies to Israel but
he hasn't pleased any of us who want to
see a suspension of arm supplies their
response to that Jeremy Corin is that
you know if they're upsetting both
Israel and the US and and you know their
allies with this decision as well as
upsetting those in the UK who want a
full ban on arms exports then they say
they they they're doing something
right well I believe they're doing
something right when I see an end to the
bombardment of Gaza an end to the
killing of innocent civilians and
children in Gaza there is nothing right
about what Israel is doing at the
present time they are are committing
acts of genocide and we should be acting
accordingly in accordance with
international law from the icj and of
course when the ICC arrest warrants are
finally issued we should act and arrest
those people that warrants have been
issued against yeah Franchesca
interestingly the British foreign
secretary has said there isn't enough
reliable evidence to make a definitive
conclusion that um Israel has violated
International humanitarian
law what do you make of this and what
more evidence do you think they they
need to to prove that British weapons
are being used against Palestinians not
just in Gaza but also in the occupied
West Bank as we've seen
recently well first of all I disagree
with him because there is enough
evidence but doesn't matter it doesn't
matter because in order to uh not to
violate the genocide convention which
contains an obligation to prevent
genocide members States need to comply
with um the obligation not to uh support
a state that might be committing
genocide and again member states have
been put on notice that there is this
risk as of the 26th of January this year
so with all due respect um whatever the
assessment of the foreign secretary the
obligations imposed by the genocide
convention are are crystal clear and
even if genocide had not been committed
yet because there is a risk there is an
obligation to prevent hence supp all
relations especially U military
strategic relations have to be
suspended okay I'll I'll ask you uh in a
bit about these reports that uh the UK
might be dropping uh its objection to
the ICC arrest warrant uh uh for Israeli
leaders when there is one and what do
you think the significance of that will
be just wanted to to bring back Sam into
the conversation and ask you some a
little bit more about uh the type of
security cooperation that exists right
now between the UK and Israel are there
more arms that are being supplied at the
moment to Israel uh than than what the
export license is approved what's the
extent of cooperation and is the British
government being uh fully transparent
about it uh they are not fully
transparent the financial figures we
sometimes hear quoted only apply to one
type of single individual export license
but most of UK arms exports to Israel go
through open licenses and especially the
open license for the
F35 companies that are registered for
that they don't need individual licenses
to export anything to any of the
countries involved in the
F35 and we don't have precise figures
the government doesn't monitor
deliveries but we estimate that the
value of UK components in F35 so far
supplied to Israel there's 39 of them is
about bartk 360 million pounds uh since
since
2016 and that does not even include
spare parts that's just the initial
manufacturer of the UK's 15% share and
there's also a lot of other uh UK
equipment that goes to Israel indirectly
so licenses which are for export to the
US of components which are then um put
assembled into larger equipment fighter
aircraft or whatever that are sold to
Israel and we don't even know if any of
those licenses those indirect licenses
are being suspended or if it's just the
direct exports to Israel which is really
only a action of the total and what
about those countries that have
suspended uh their arm sales to Israel
like Spain for example what impact has
that had some unfortunately not very
much as the countries that have
suspended arm sales are largely the ones
that weren't uh supplying very much uh
in any case and in cases like the
Netherlands again uh unfortunately the
courts have allowed them this loophole
no direct exports but the indirect
exports uh via the us or other countries
that's okay for the
F35 it seems that um everyone treats
This Global supply chain for the F-35 as
absolutely sacred and coming before uh
international law and the genocide
Convention as Franchesca has talked
about ought to be the absolute priority
through any country okay M Mr Corbin
what what next here then I know you
formed a group of independ MPS uh to
campaign against armed sales uh against
Israel among other things what impact do
you think your group can make you you're
surrounded by a labor party that's very
much pro Israel the Tories who are very
much pro Israel as well what difference
what impact do you think you can make
with this group well we're very clear
the five of us that we are wanting to
end the armed sales to Israel and we
want to see peace for the Palestinian
people and that means an end to the
genocide and the bombardment
we're not a majority in Parliament
obviously we're nowhere near that
however there are large numbers of Labor
MPS who are very concerned about all
this feeling an enormous amount of
pressure from their constituents in many
parts of the country the labor vote went
down in the recent general election very
significantly largely because of issues
surrounding Gaza the demonstrations have
increased in size not decreased in size
the popular support for the Palestinian
people is bigger than I've ever known in
my lifetime so we will be upping our
game upping our campaigning and going
out more and more making the case and
the armed sales to Israel to save lives
and I think there's actually a
significant number of people in Israel
that have beginning to realize from the
demonstrations yesterday that their
government has got to do something in
order to end the occupation and then the
continual bombardment of Gaza franches
albanesi I'll give you the last word do
you see
uh the tide changing now with this
ratcheting up of public pressure as
Jeremy mentioned there and also
political pressure uh do do you see you
know a change in international uh legal
uh expectations soon o over this issue
yeah I do see the change I do see the
change of Tide because not only there is
a a global movement in solidarity with
the Palestinian people and with the
Israelis who want the end of the
genocide now and the end of the
apartheid in the long term but it's
going to be a very a very long journey
because the system both in Israel and
through its support particularly from
Member state is tightening and so there
is a lot more effort including from
Civil Society than needs to go into
supporting and making this uh uh change
of Tide even more um meaningful
effective and and visible thank you very
much to all three of you for for a great
uh conversation Franchesca albanesi
Jeremy Corin s pilo Freeman thank you
for joining us on Inside Story and thank
you to for watching you can always watch
this program again anytime by visiting
our website at al.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and of
course you can join the conversation on
X our handle is that AJ inside story
from me fi btio and the whole team here
in Doha thanks for watching bye for now
[Music]